\startcomponent chapter7

\product thesis

\environment layout 

\Chapter{Summary and perspectives}

\Section{Summary}

The previous Chapters have introduced and showcased novel approaches for
explorative and integrative modeling in the presence of cryo-EM data and
distance restraints.  In \inchapter[chapter:powerfit] I presented the PowerFit
software, a Python package for fast cross correlation based rigid body fitting
of high-resolution structures in low-resolution densities. PowerFit comes with
a new more sensitive scoring function, the core-weighted local cross
correlation, in addition to an optimized protocol for fast fitting. In
\inchapter[chapter:image-pyramids] I reported results of an extensive benchmark
of the PowerFit software using 379 subunits of 5 ribosome density maps. The
success rate of unambiguously fitting subunits bigger than 100 residues reached
approximately 90\% up to 12\Angstrom\ resolution, showing that objective
fitting methods have matured to aid in structural modeling. The limits of rigid
body fitting can be leveraged through the use of image pyramids to gain a
speedup of a factor of 30 on CPUs and 40 on GPUs, and it allows the
identification of possible over-interpreted regions of the density on an
objective basis. 

\inchapter[chapter:haddock-em] describes the incorporation and benchmarking of
cryo-EM data into the data-driven docking program HADDOCK. The approach is
flexible and can be fully combined with other available sources of data in
HADDOCK. The approach was demonstrated on two ribosome systems, two
virus-antibody systems, and a symmetric pentamer. An update of the HADDOCK
webserver was presented in \inchapter[chapter:haddock2.2], and shows the
extensive usage of the software all over the world. 

\inchapter[chapter:disvis] dealt with explorative modeling using distance
restraints in general, and cross-link data specifically. I introduced the
concept of the accessible interaction space and presented a method to quantify
and visualize it. This directly indicates the information content of distance
restraints and shows whether all data is self-consistent and, if not, it gives
an indication of which restraint is a false-positive. The approach was
implemented in another Python package, DisVis. However, the approach is general
and can easily be incorporated into FFT-based docking programs allowing the use
of distance restraints by combining the 'marriage made in heaven' of sampling
and scoring \cite[Vajda2013]. 

I extended the approach further in
\inchapter[chapter:inferring-interface-residues], and presented a method to
infer interface residues from distance restraints using the concept of the
average-interactions-per-complex (AIC) statistic. The AIC provides an objective
frequentist probability for a residue to be at interface in respect of the
data.  Furthermore, I benchmarked the use of cross-link based distance
restraints in HADDOCK using four different approaches. It was shown that using
the solely the unambiguous distance restraints is suboptimal, and they should
either be complemented with center-of-mass restraints or DisVis-based ambiguous
interactions restraints.


\Section{Challenges of integrative modeling}

The field of integrative modeling is still relatively young, and several
challenges are ahead that the whole structural biology community should face,
since integrative approaches are increasingly applied to solve the structure of
large macromolecular assemblies. Recently a task force was assigned by the
Worldwide PDB (wwPDB) to make recommendations for the field to follow in order
to consistently progress, resulting in the First wwPDB Hybrid/Integrative
Methods Task Force Workshop \cite[Sali2015]. The task force ultimately came up
with 5 recommendations involving data-representation, model validation and
data-archives.  The 5 recommendations were that: 1) the experimental and
computational protocols in addition to the structural models should be
deposited; 2) multiple model representations should be allowed for multi-scale
and multi-temporal models; 3) new procedures should be developed to ascertain
model uncertainty and accuracy; 4) a federated system of data archives should
be created; and 5) publications standards need to be developed for integrative
models as is already the case for X-ray and NMR structures.

Thus point 1, 4 and 5 are mainly about the reproducibility of integrative
structural models, point 2 is about what data-structures and format standards
to use, so far all more practical matters reflecting the current immature
status of the field than real inherent scientific challenges; except for point
3 that explicitly deals with the precision and accuracy together with
validation of integrative models. Even though for several experimental
techniques cross-validation (SAXS, \cite[Rambo2013]) and confidence interval
(cryo-EM, \cite[Volkmann2009]) measures have been developed, they have been
infrequently used and thus far not been combined. For other methods such as
cross-links coupled with mass-spectrometry (CXMS) the statistical propensities
of derived distance restraints have only been sparsely studied with small
benchmark and sample sizes \cite[Kahraman2013, Leitner2014]. 

To gain deeper insight into the uncertainty of integrative models and current
validation approaches, requires new high-quality elaborate benchmarks on
systems for which both high-resolution structures are available for the bound
state and the unbound state, of which the protein-protein docking benchmark is
a prime example \cite[Vreven2015], together with additional experimental data.
Especially for upcoming promising techniques as SAXS and CXMS, experimental
data on multiple well-investigated systems is missing even for binary protein
interactions.  Though there are data-bases for CXMS \cite[Zheng2013,
Kahraman2013], they are relatively small, e.g. the XLdb reports 62 intra-chain
cross-links of which 34 are coming from a single RNA polymerase II system
\cite[Rappsilber2011, Kahraman2013], and . The small sample size and questionable
reproducibility of the results are major inhibitors in the development of
robust validation and uncertainty protocols.  Thus, for the integrative
structural biology field to properly move forward a \emph{quid pro quo}
mentality needs to be established between both experimental and computational
scientists: additional experiments should also be performed solely to further
understanding of the scope and limitations the data are providing, so that in
turn computational models can be delivered to answer important biological
questions.


\Section{Future guidelines and additional fields of research}

\Subsection{Explorative modeling}

To adequately model the uncertainty of integrative models the emphasis should
be turned more towards the data itself by investigating the amount of
information the data carry by searching and quantifying the whole interaction
space, for which the methodology was presented in \inchapter[chapter:disvis].
The approach for appreciating the information content of distance restraints
can be further extended by using a statistical distance preference function,
i.e. a knowledge based potential, inferred from experimental data to better
investigate the probability distribution of the accessible interaction space.
Similar approaches can be developed for SAXS (though computationally more
expensive as the scattering curve needs to calculated millions to billions of
times), and other biochemical and biophyscial based potentials, such as surface
overlap/van der Waals interactions. Thus instead of heuristically optimizing
the number of acceptable models within the top X best scoring structures using
a linear combination of (pseudo-)energies, as is common in the docking field
\cite[Vajda2009], the energy distributions can be analyzed to give further
indication of the reliability of each measure and from there on define
confidence intervals in models. Established probability distributions can
afterwards be used as Bayesian priors in an effort to move to Bayesian
statistical models.


\Subsection{Formal structural biology}

Further investigations into the accuracy of individual experimental methods
require scientist that are accostumed to both computational and experimental
techniques, the \emph{hybrid scientist}. This allows the scientist to perform
experiments to further guide and validate the computational models, ultimately
resulting in a \emph{formal structural biology}, where instead of directly
advancing biological insight, the emphasis shifts towards investigating the
accuracy and precision of the models and experimental methods \emph{an sich}.
In the semi-long run this approach will become a fertile and stabile foundation
to build upon for in-depth structural research in challenging and interesting
biological systems and networks and resulting in a more formal approach in
structure determination from multiple data sources.


\Section{Conclusion}

The (integrative) structural biology field is a fast moving and exciting field
of research, with many experimental and computational advances.  The most
recent dramatic example is of course the spectacular improvement of the cryo-EM
field due to direct electron detectors. Even though atomic resolution can now
be achieved for stable complexes, the bulk of the resulting densities need
additional data from diverse sources for a structural interpretation, requiring
high-end integrative methods. However, there are still significant challenges
to overcome for integrative modeling, mainly aimed at reproducibility of the
results and determining the uncertaintly of models. This thesis has laid out
advances for the field to move forward to by showcasing integrative modeling
approaches and introducing new methods for quantifying the information content
of experimental data. 

\stopcomponent
